hi friends in this video
Let us learn the file basics
First let us discuss about file pointer
So files are stored in the ROM of the read only
memory
So how can we access these files? We can efficiently
access the files using file pointers. The syntax to create
a file pointer is File * pointer_name
Semi Colon
Now how to open a file?
So to open a file. we need to use the
fopen function so that we can read or write
data. In the fopen function
We have two arguments
Both arguments should be placed within double quotes
The first argument is the file name with extension. For
example file.txt
But if we give the file name like this, it
will only check in the current folder where the programme
is stored
Or we can also give the absolute path of the
file like the driver name folder name file name with
extension
So it is important to add the file extension also like
.txt .c etc
The next argument is the file opening mode
We can open a file for reading or writing or
both
read and write etc
To open a file in reading mode
Specify r in double codes and w for writing mode
a for append mode
Other opening modes are r+ w+ a+
etcetera
Now see an example programme
Here we are opening a file named file.txt
from the current directory
To read the data, let us create a file pointer
fp and call fopen function by giving name of
file and the opening mode
So it is important to note that the fopen
function will not directly point the file's address. Because to
read or write data directly to the secondary memory takes
a lot of resources and time
For example if you want to read a single character
from file.txt it will go through
C library and then it will call the operating system
And then the operating system will initiate the driver to
read the data
So to read a single character it takes a lot
of resources and time
Similarly if you want to read another character it follows
the same way which is not an efficient method to
access the file. So when we open a file using
fopen function attach a buffer to the file and
it will load the whole file contents into the buffer
The buffer will reside in the random access memory and
gather all the information on file structure
This file structure contains information on buffer size, buffer pointer
and current buffer position etcetera and it returns the file
structure pointer to file pointer
Here Buffer address 1024 is placed in buffer
pointer and the file structure Address 5024 is assigned to
file Pointer fp.
So instead of reading it from disc the file pointer
loads the content of the file
Only once in the buffer and further read or write
will happen in the buffer
Now we try to open a file file.txt
but we can see that File1.txt
is Present file2.txt is also present in ROM
but our required file
is not present. So fopen is unable to find
the file so it will return the NULL pointer
So if file pointer fp is not equal to NULL
it means the opening was successful
Then we can access the file. Now let's read a
file character by character
For that we have the function fgetc using
fgetc function
We can read a character from the file. This is
syntax fgetc(file_pointer ) it will return
a single character from the buffer and automatically moves the
position of pointer to the next character
See an example we have the content log2
EOF or End of file represents the end of the file
so fgetc will read l and moves the
current position of pointer to o.
Now this function call will read o
and moves a pointer to g and this will
continue. Now
if it reaches the end of the file it will
return EOF. Now let us see an example. Here we
created the file pointer fp and we call the
function fopen to open file.txt
Now we call fgetc to get a character
to the character variable letter
So first character w is returned to letter. Now in
a while loop, we print the letters scanned and again
read the character using fgetc. So w is
printed and is read to letter
This is continued until we reach the end of the
file
So we get the output
Welcome to log2base2 visual computer science
tutorials
So we opened the file. We read the content and
we printed it also
Now we need to close the file because we're done
with it. So we can use the function fclose
So we are closing the file pointer. The syntax for
that is fclose (file pointer)  semi colon
Here we can write fclose(fp). If we
close the file
The buffer associated with the file is removed from the
memory
So we must close the file when it is no
longer needed
Now let us see how to read a string from
a file
For that we have the fgets function
We have three arguments to this function. The string address
the size of the string and the file pointer.
See an example programme. Here we set size equal to 10
Now we have to understand fgets will read
characters up to size and it is important that size
include NULL character also. So here it will read nine
characters and one NULL character
So here we create the file pointer and call the
fopen function
To open the file file.txt and
we create a string str with size 10 to read
the string. fp is not equal to NULL.
SO file open was success
So in a while we read and print strings of
size 10 till we reach NULL
That is if it reaches the end of
the file, the fgets function will be returning
NULL
So we read and print string until we reach the
end of the file
So first string of size 10 "welcome t" will
be read and "welcome t"
will be printed. In the next iteration next string
of size 10 "o log2bas" will
be read and printed. In the next iteration "e2."
will be read and printed
Now we can close the file
So these were some basic file operations
We learned how to open a file
We can use fopen function for that
Then we can read character by character using fgetc
and to read a string
We have fgets and finally to close a
file
We have function fclose. In the coming videos
We will be discussing how to write data to
a file
How to copy
a file etcetera
So that's all and thank you for watching this video